Source control repositories are one of a software developer's most important tools.
GitHub is a popular repository that has a large community that supports it.
In this video, we're going to set up a GitHub repository.
This will include setting up an account, creating your first repository, creating your first
file, and then cloning the repository with GitHub Desktop.
Let's get started.
To set up an account on GitHub, I'll browse to https.github.com.
This is the online portal to GitHub where you can do almost anything you need to do
in the repository, including writing code.
I'll use the portal to set up an account and create a repository.
Next, I'll select the Sign Up button from the upper menu to begin the sign up process.
Users need an active email address to sign up for GitHub.
I'll enter my email address and then select Continue.
Now I'll create a unique password.
GitHub has some password requirements that I'll need to meet, and I can't use any part
of my username in the password.
Once I have a password I like, I'll write it down somewhere safe so I don't forget it
and then select Continue.
Now I'll create my username.
My username is how I'll be recognized by others on GitHub.
This is particularly important when you're working with teams on GitHub.
My username will need to be unique on GitHub, so I'll create something meaningful but not
too simple.
Once I've created a unique username, I'll select Continue.
While I'm welcome to sign up for email from GitHub if I'd like, for this example I'll
leave the email preferences box unchecked and then select Continue.
For security reasons, GitHub wants to make sure an automated machine isn't creating the
account, so it will ask me to solve a few simple puzzles to verify that a real person
is signing up.
I'll start this process by selecting Verify, then following the prompts GitHub presents.
Once I've completed the verification process, I'm just about done.
GitHub wants to make sure I have a valid and active email account, so after the validation
check, it will automatically send me an email with an 8-digit number it calls the launch
code.
When the email arrives, I'll enter the launch code in the boxes provided.
A successful launch code will take me to the sign-in page.
Now I'm ready to sign into my new account.
I'll use the credentials I created earlier.
I'll enter my username or email address, I can use either, and my password in the boxes
provided and then I'll select Sign In.
If all goes well, GitHub will take me to the Welcome page where I can personalize my experience.
For this walkthrough, I'll skip personalization by selecting the Skip Personalization link
at the bottom of the page.
I'll then continue to the GitHub interface where I can create my first repository.
Repositories can be public or private.
A private repository is one that only I can use, while public repositories are visible
to anyone on the internet.
The private repository is selected by default and I'll keep that option selected.
It's best practice to create a README file that is available on your repository's landing
page, so select Create in the README section.
I'll create a simple README that says this is my first repository.
The file is a markdown file, which is a markup format for creating styles and text documents,
but I'll just add plain text without any markup.
When I'm done with my changes, I'll select Commit Changes.
Committing Changes stores the README in a new GitHub repository.
When you commit a file or files to GitHub, it's best practice to add a description of
what you changed so other developers can know what's new in the file.
I'll add a description for the README commit and then select Commit Change.
To see the README in my repository, I'll select Code from the tab bar.
Be aware that there's a button and a tab that both say Code.
For this activity, I'm selecting the code Tab.
This tab shows me all the code in my repository and gives me options for managing my repository.
At this point, the repository only exists on GitHub.com.
This is helpful, but GitHub enables me to create a clone of this repository on my computer
so I can work independently and update the online repository only when I want to.
This is most useful when developers are working in teams.
Now that I have the repository set up and the README in it, I'll clone it locally so
I can edit the file on my computer.
I'm going to use the GitHub Desktop tool to manage this process.
Select the Code button to reveal the options for cloning the repository.
You'll notice the option for GitHub Desktop.
Selecting the GitHub Desktop option will take us to the tool's home page.
From there, we can download and install the tool.
I'm going to select Download Now to download and install the tool.
After the tool installs, it will display the splash screen where you can sign in to GitHub.
I'll select Sign into GitHub.com to start the sign-in process.
GitHub Desktop takes me to an authorization screen where I can give it permission to use
my GitHub account.
I'll select Continue to proceed to the Authorization Options screen.
The Authorize GitHub Desktop page allows me to customize the permissions I give to GitHub
Desktop.
I'm going to leave everything at the defaults and select Authorize Desktop to finish the
authorization process.
This will take me back to GitHub Desktop where I can finish the configuration.
The tool automatically selects the option to use my GitHub account information, so I'll
leave that selected and then select Finish to complete the setup.
Now I'm ready to clone my repository to my local hard disk.
Because I signed in to GitHub and authorized GitHub Desktop to use my account, the tool
automatically provides me with the repositories I have on GitHub.
When I select the repository I created earlier, GitHub Desktop gives me the option to clone
it to my local disk.
I'll select the button to clone my online repository.
GitHub Desktop takes me to the Clone screen and has selected and pre-filled items on the
URL tab.
I'll leave all values to the defaults except for the location on my local disk where I
want to clone the repository.
I already created a development folder on my computer, so I'm going to type that into
the Local Path text box.
GitHub automatically will create a subfolder for the repository.
With the folder location set, I'll select Clone to start the cloning process.
This will copy the repository from GitHub to my local machine.
GitHub Desktop provides me with a status page as it downloads the files to the folder I
selected.
When the download is complete, it will take me to the main GitHub Desktop interface where
I can interact with the repository.
GitHub Desktop's left pane lets me know if any files have changed.
The right pane gives you the options for opening your repository so you can review the files
in it and edit them if necessary.
Since I just cloned the repository, the GitHub Desktop doesn't have any files that have changed.
I'm going to open the repository in my File Manager.
I'll select Show in Explorer to open the repository in Windows Explorer where I'll be able to
review the files which, for now, only include the README that I created earlier.
Notice that the folder includes the README.md file but also a .git folder.
This folder contains files that the Git technology uses to maintain information about the repository.
You should rarely need to work with any of the files in this folder and can ignore them.
If this folder doesn't appear for you, don't worry.
It's there but it's hidden and still can be used to manage your repository.
Now I'll edit the README file using Notepad.
Although it has a markdown extension, it's a plain text file so you can make changes
using editors like Notepad on Windows or TextEdit on Mac.
I'll right-click on the README.md file and select Edit in Notepad to open the file.
You'll notice that the content of the README is exactly the same as when I created it on GitHub.
This is because when you clone a repository, it copies the files exactly as they are.
Then when you make changes, GitHub is aware of them and will allow you to synchronize
your changes with the repository in GitHub.
I'll make a change to this file and show how that works.
I'll add a new line, this is my first edit, to the README and then select Save from the File menu.
Now that I've saved the file, GitHub is aware that it has been updated.
I'll close the file in Notepad since I'm done updating it.
Now I'll return to the GitHub Desktop application.
Notice that the interface is updated automatically.
The left pane tells me that the README has changed and the tool updates me with the changes in the right pane.
I can even compare each line in the original with those in the changed version.
At this point, the change is only on my local disk and technically isn't in the repository yet.
GitHub has noticed that the change has been made, but now I need to commit it to the repository.
Once I commit it, it will be in the cloned repository in my local disk,
but won't be in the repository on github.com yet.
First, I'll commit it to my local repository.
In the description field, I'll write a note about what's changed,
just as I did when I first created the README file.
Then I'll select Commit to Main.
When I commit the file to my repository,
GitHub Desktop indicates that there are no more changes in my local repository.
But it also indicates that the changes I just committed to my local repository
are ready to be pushed to the origin, which is the place from which I cloned the repository.
In this case, the origin is my repository on github.com.
I'll select Push to Origin to update the remote repository with my change.
GitHub Desktop informs me that it's pushing the changes to the README
to the repository on github.com and lets me know when it's done.
Now I'll return to github.com.
Notice that the README file on the remote repository
reflects the changes I made on my local machine.
GitHub is a powerful way to maintain a record of your development file
so you can track changes over time
and have your files in multiple locations if something goes wrong.
But what if you have files in your local folder repository
that you don't want to sync with your repository?
GitHub is a way to manage that too.
By creating a special file called gitignore,
you can tell GitHub not to pay attention to certain files
so any changes you make to them won't be updated to GitHub.
I'm going to return to my local repository in Windows Explorer
so we can examine how this works.
In my repository folder, I'll create a new file called personalfile.txt
that has a line of text in it.
Because this is a new file, GitHub Desktop will be aware of it
and prompt me to commit it to the repository.
When I return to GitHub Desktop,
the file is in fact represented as a changed file
ready to be committed to my local repository.
But I don't want GitHub to notice this file
so I'll ask the tool to ignore it.
When I right-click on the file in GitHub Desktop,
the menu allows me to add the file to gitignore.
Even though I don't have a gitignore file yet,
GitHub Desktop will create one for me.
If I already had a gitignore file,
GitHub Desktop would add personalfile.txt
to the list of files it should ignore.
I'll select ignore file, add to .gitignore,
so GitHub will ignore the file.
When I choose to ignore personalfile.txt,
it becomes hidden from GitHub Desktop
and the tool no longer notices any changes I make to the file.
It also created the gitignore file for me.
I can then commit gitignore to my repository
and sync it with github.com so it's safe in both places.
In this video, you learned how to set up a GitHub repository.
Using GitHub with Desktop tools,
developers can securely store their source code,
share it with others, and track changes
as they work on their code.